Lab Sheet 1 

Basic Linux Commands and DOS Commands 

Objective: To understand to setup the environment to run Linux and DOS Commands and execute different Linux and DOS Commands. 

Basic Commands:  

Login and Authentication Login access computer; start interactive session Logout disconnect terminal session Passwd change local login password; you MUST set a non-trivial password Information  

date :show date and time  

history :list of previously executed commands  

pine :send or receive mail messages  

msgs :display system messages  

man :show on-line documentation by program name  

info :on-line documentation for GNU programs  

w, :who who is on the system and what are they doing  

who :am i who is logged onto this terminal  

top :show system status and top CPU-using processes  

uptime :show one line summary of system status  

finger :find out info about a user@system  

 

File Management  

cat combine files  

cp copy files  

ls list files in a directory and their attributes  

mv change file name or directory location  

rm remove files  

ln create another link (name) to a file  

chmod set file permissions  

des encrypt a data file with a private key  

find find files that match specified criteria  

 

Display Contents of Files  

cat copy file to display device  

vi screen editor for modifying text files  

more show text file on display terminal with paging control  

head show first few lines of a file(s)  

tail show last few lines of a file; or reverse line order  

grep display lines that match a pattern  

lpr send file to line printer  

pr format file with page headers, multiple columns etc.  

diff compare two files and show differences  

cmp compare two binary files and report if different  

od display binary file as equivalent octal/hex codes  

file examine file(s) and tell you whether text, data, etc.  

wc count characters, words, and lines in a file  

 

Directories  

cd change to new directory  

mkdir create new directory  

rmdir remove empty directory (remove files first)  

mv change name of directory  

pwd show current directory  

 

Devices  

df summarize free space on disk device  

du show disk space used by files or directories  

 

 

Description of Commonly Used UNIX Commands The description for the most commonly used UNIX commands is given below in an alphabetic order. 

cat cat allows you to read multiple files and then print them out. You can combine files by using the > operator and append files by using >>.  

Syntax: cat [argument] [specific file]  

Example:  

cat abc.txt If you want to append three files (abc.txt, def.txt, xyz.txt), give the command as, cat abc.txt def.txt xyz.txt > all 

cd, chdir cd (or chdir) stands for ―change directory. This command is the key command to move around your file structure. Syntax: cd [name of directory you want to move to] When changing directories, start with / and then type the complete file path, like cd /vvs/abc/def in this eg. You are moving from vvs directory to abc directory then move to def directory . You can also move relative to the current directory by typing cd vvs/abc/def To move relative to the parent directory of your current directory, use Cd ../vvs/abc/def 

chmod  

chmod (which stands for ―change mode‖) changes who can access a particular file. A ―mode‖ is created by combining the various options from who, opcode, and permission. Syntax: chmod [option] mode file 

 

cp The cp command copies files or directories from one place to another. You can copy a set of files to another file, or copy one or more files under the same name in a directory. If the destination of the file you want to copy is an existing file, then the existing file is overwritten. If the destination is an existing directory, then the file is copied into that directory. 

Syntax: cp [options] file1 file2 If you want to copy the file favourites.html into the directory called laksh, you give the command as: cp favourites.html /vvs/laksh/ A handy option to use with cp is -r. This recursively copies a particular directory and all of its contents to the specified directory, so you won‘t have to copy one file at a time. 